Just like design patterns in software engineering prevent us from
reinventing the wheel when we're faced with a new problem to solve,
we have some deployment strategies that have been defined,
tested out, and proven by those who have already blazed this trail.
So let's take a look at four very popular deployment strategies.
Let's talk about big bang deployment,
also known as, we don't really have a deployment strategy.
In big bang, you simply replace A with B,
no intermediaries, no fail saves,
just throwing caution to the wind.
For example, your current production version is live and serving customers,
then one day you have a new version you'd like to deploy to production.
So you remove or disable your production version,
which means you stop serving customers altogether,
then you copy over your new version and then bring production backup.
One of the pros to big bang is that it
is the simplest deployment strategy of all to perform.
On the other hand, one of the biggest cons to big bang is
the downtime while you're replacing the old version with the new version.
Also, big bang encourages teams to batch
up their changes until a deployment is large enough to justify the costs.
Because of the bigger batches of changes,
it also requires more testing and coordination.
Because of all that, features go to the market very slowly.
In blue green deployment strategy,
there is a router that is directing traffic to our old version.
In this case, the blue version.
The dev team has a new version to push to production,
which will be our green version.
So we build a new production version infrastructure and all,
deploy the changes and test,
if everything checks out from our smoke tests,
we can promote the green version by telling our router to switch from blue to green.
If there's any problem at all,
we can quickly and easily switch back to blue.
Once we're sure we don't need blue anymore,
we can actually remove it to cut down on costs.
One of the good things about blue-green deployment strategy is that it allows you
to test a new production deployment without disturbing the old one.
Plus, if it doesn't work for you,
you can just do a fast roll back,
and the impact on application users is pretty low.
One downside is that there are
higher infrastructure costs when you have two production versions running,
depending on how long you keep them both running.
How about canary deployment strategy?
You may have heard it called rolling update.
The idea here is, like blue green,
you'll have two versions of production running side-by-side.
Also like blue green,
we will have some router that is able to direct traffic to either old or new version.
The router will slowly begin to direct a fraction of traffic to
the new version while the development team watches for problems.
As the deployment continues over a period of time,
the router sends more and more traffic to
the new version until the old version is no longer even used.
Then once you're sure the old version isn't needed anymore,
we can just clean it up.
The canary deployment strategy is
useful if you want to roll out changes to users little by little.
If there's a problem, you can just stop the rollback
and you've affected only a small portion of users.
However, infrastructure costs are definitely higher than
big bang because you will have two versions of production running for a period of time.
It's also quite a bit more difficult to set up.
A fourth strategy is A/B testing.
It's similar to canary,
but instead of routing traffic to just a fraction of users,
we'll have the option to route traffic for either version based on
user characteristics like age, favorite color, gender.
In my example here,
the company wants to try out a new version on women first to see how they like it.
If they don't like it,
they can easily switch those women back to the old version.
If that group of users likes the new version or it doesn't have any problems,
we could potentially roll out the new version to the rest of the users.
We could even clean up the old version to cut out some costs.
One pro that I'll mention about this A/B testing is that it helps you get
feedback from segments of users on new versions while leaving other users in peace.
There are a few downsides, of course.
For example, this is potentially a very costly method of user acceptance testing.
There are other ways to do A/B testing that don't require full production deployments,
but you should look at all of this on a case-by-case basis.
A/B testing is also quite a bit more difficult to set up than canary,
which is already quite a challenge to set up.
Its up to you to decide which type of deployment is right for your company and your team.